hi everybody my name is Shawna and this 
is the American English podcast my goal
here is to teach you the English spoken
in the United States through common
Expressions pronunciation tips and
interesting cultural Snippets or stories
I hope to keep this fun useful and
interesting let's do it
thank you
hi everyone welcome back this is episode
number 120 geography of the United
States
today you're going to learn so many fun
facts about the us all of which have to
do with geography
you'll hear about the topography so the
physical features of the land that make
it visually unique and you'll also learn
about the population so where residents
are distributed throughout the country
distributed I'm going to say that one
more time not distributed but
distributed emphasis on that RI there in
the middle
in any case by the end of this episode
you should have a solid geographical
overview of the United States and be
able to talk about geography in English
this is a five minute English episode so
in a matter of five minutes or close to
it I hope you'll hear loads of topic
specific vocabulary so much that it can
be overwhelming a smart human would not
be able to retain all of the vocabulary
in this lesson after listening once
first off you should listen twice
and secondly don't stress this is an
advanced listening exercise so to make
the most of it you can do one of two
things
first you could you know look up all of
the vocab words on your own and take
notes and then push yourself to master
all of the terms on your own
or you could sign up to premium content
at
americanenglishpodcast.com the premium
content for five minute English episodes
includes everything you need to learn
and retain the challenging terms you
hear in the audio you'll be given the
definitions for key vocabulary exercises
to practice it as well as quizzes to
make sure you've learned what you should
have you also get a pronunciation video
and much more many of my students who
have signed up to premium content have
written and told me how much they enjoy
the supplementary material and how much
it has helped their learning process
so once again to access premium content
go to
americanenglishpodcast.com or you can
find the direct link inside of the
episode notes
before we begin
I need to mention that today we are
talking about the 50 U.S states I'm not
talking about U.S territories which
include Guam Puerto Rico U.S Virgin
Islands Mariana Islands or American
Samoa but uh we will talk about those in
a future episode each of the places I
just mentioned are unique they have a
unique relationship with the US and
their own story their own vibrant
culture they deserve their own episodes
so stay tuned for that
if anyone listening is from a U.S
territory or a disputed territory I'd
love to talk to you please write to me
on Instagram you can find me at American
English podcast
without any further Ado let's begin
talking about the United States

take a deep breath
and look around you
for as far as you can see there are
grassy fields and cows
you're in Lebanon
not the country Lebanon Kansas the
geographic center of the contiguous
United States
smack dab in the middle if you drive to
the West Coast it'll take you around 22
hours to the east coast another 22. a
cross-country road trip would take
almost two days driving Non-Stop
that's a big country in fact if
countries were ranked by size the U.S
would come in Forth after Russia Canada
and China it's 3.8 million square miles
and I should say third or fourth
depending on who you're talking to by
now you probably know that the US is
part of North America and there are 50
states each represented by a star on the
American flag
the 48 connected States the ones
sandwiched between Canada and Mexico we
call the contiguous U.S or more casually
the lower 48. the other two Alaska and
Hawaii are really out there
Alaska which is our biggest state
one-sixth the size of Europe sits just
55 miles away from Russia it has Arctic
temperatures and long icy Winters Hawaii
our southernmost State and Island state
has the same latitude as Mexico City and
boasts tropical weather year round just
like Southern Florida
the states are spread out in fact we
have six different time zones Hawaiian
Alaskan Pacific Mountain Central and
Eastern Time
my question to you is if you could live
anywhere in the U.S where would that be
approximately
332 million people live in the states
ranking third after China and India and
according to the U.S census a whopping
29.1 percent of the population live near
the coast
there are three main coastlines the
Pacific Coast or West Coast is where
you'll find Washington Oregon and
California as well as icy cold Pacific
ocean water and chilly nights while
you'll find tons of beachgoers and
sunbathers in SoCal AKA Southern
California up north the beaches are less
crowded and are often part of Scenic
hiking trails
the Atlantic ocean is off of the East
Coast with a number of famous beach
cities and towns from the Latin infused
Miami and Southern Florida all the way
to the rich New England beach towns up
north like the Hamptons Cape Cod
Nantucket and Martha's Vineyard just
picture Rocky coasts with lighthouses
and Colonial architecture the Gulf of
Mexico is sometimes called the Third
Coast and is a popular destination for
divers who want to visit its coral reefs
and shipwrecks the coastline is spotted
with oil rigs one-sixth of the u.s's
crude oil is taken from there
the gulf also hugs a region that we call
the South
which is actually the southeast from
Texas to the Atlantic coast that area
the South has a reputation for being hot
and humid especially near its Wetlands
such as swamps and rivers in wintertime
you can also find snow at higher
elevations just take a trip to the
Appalachian mountain range the Ozarks or
head to the Great Plains just west of
the Mississippi River
speaking of rivers the U.S has over 250
000 of them the longest is the Missouri
River a tributary of the Mississippi our
second largest the Mississippi though is
debatably more popular it's the setting
for many classic American novels like
Huckleberry Finn and The Adventures of
Tom Sawyer and it plays an important
role in U.S history since it is where
Native American tribes and settlers
chose to live fish and harvest for
thousands of years
take a look at a map the river stretches
from north to south bordering 10
different states and looks like a man
with a top hat
many beaches in the United States are
not near the ocean
the Great Lakes region is spotted with
charming beach towns and cozy getaway
spots ten percent of the U.S population
call it home
there are five lakes Superior Michigan
Huron Erie and Ontario and we share all
of them except Lake Michigan with our
Northern neighbor Canada
together they make up 84 percent of the
US's fresh surface water Lake Superior
is the largest of them and is also the
second largest lake in the world
the states in the Great Lake Region and
just to the west of it are referred to
as the Midwest which can be confusing
because although it is mid or
Central it's nowhere near the West Coast
it's north and Central the name was
created back when everything west of the
Appalachian Mountains was considered
West there you'll find Rolling Hills
Plains and grasslands
the Northeast is home to many of the
original 13 colonies and also to a few
famous cities like Boston Philadelphia
and New York
the region is also known for its
distinct Seasons photographers flock
during fall to catch the leaves changing
colors while the most densely populated
city is New York City with 8.8 million
residents and the most populated state
is California with around 40 million
there are areas of the United States
that are stunning and very sparsely
populated the southwest Arizona New
Mexico parts of Utah and debutable
California is known to be dry or arid
long Barren highways in the desert lined
with cactus lead visitors to old western
Corrals sections of Route 66 in the
iconic Red Rocks that the Southwest are
known for you can catch a sunset at the
Grand Canyon admire red Sandstone arches
at arches National Park the hoodoos at
Bryce Canyon the valley of Zion or even
have a tour of the Sandstone Buttes in
Monument Valley with a Navajo guide how
cool
the West is also known for the Rockies
which are popular for skiing Yellowstone
National Park forts geothermal hot
springs and Wildlife but perhaps the
most challenging Adventure would be a
hiking trip to the highest peak in the
country Denali which sits at twenty
thousand three hundred feet above sea
level in Alaska
at negative 282 feet below sea level
Death Valley is the lowest point in the
country and can be found in eastern
California just north of the Mojave
Desert on July 10 1913 the National
Weather Service measured a
record-breaking
134 degrees Fahrenheit there
that's 56.7 degrees Celsius
what many find surprising is the fact
that in spite of its name Death Valley
is known for life in springtime you
might just spot a big horned sheep
walking through fields of yellow flowers
maybe even a roadrunner BB
come to the U.S while on the west coast
you should consider checking out Redwood
National Park to see Hyperion the
tallest tree in the world at 380 feet
tall or check out General Sherman the
most massive tree in the world a sequoia
at 52 500 cubic feet that's located in
Sequoia National Park just up north you
can check out the deep blue of Crater
Lake in Oregon the deepest lake in the
U.S or take a trip to Bonville salt
flats in Utah or the Great Sand Dunes of
Southern Colorado take a lot of pictures
so your friends will come too

I hope you enjoyed the talk about
geography there's so much more that
could be discussed here but this is a
good first overview
before I hang up today I do want to
clarify a few facts about U.S geography
that often confuse people the first
being the capital of the U.S the capital
of the U.S is Washington DC which was
named after the first president of the
U.S George Washington the man you'll see
on our one dollar bill and also on the
U.S quarter the capital also known as DC
which stands for the District of
Columbia is not in any state it's
actually sandwiched between Maryland and
Virginia it's on the east coast about
four hours south of New York City the
capital has nothing to do with
Washington which is a state on the west
coast to avoid confusion don't forget to
say DC when you're talking about the U.S
Capitol
number two Americans do not agree on
which states are technically within each
region for example the South some people
say that Northern Florida is part of the
South other people don't include Florida
at all Texas is sometimes in it
sometimes it's left out sometimes it's
considered part of the Southwest some
people divide Texas in two
it all depends it's related to culture
it's related to the way that the land
looks and yeah just wanted to clarify
that sometimes even among Americans
there is confusion same thing with
California many people think Oh
California that's not part of the
Southwest whereas when they go to the
eastern part of California with Death
Valley and some of the cactus that you
see you kind of get that image of the
Southwest in your mind some people
include it some people don't
number three I mentioned the largest
state is Alaska our smallest state is
Rhode Island and it's not actually an
island
I mentioned that Denali is the highest
peak in the U.S and it's in Alaska
fun fact the official name for Denali
was actually Mount McKinley up until
2015.
I grew up hearing Mount McKinley so yeah
that was a surprise to me when the name
changed
after recording this episode I decided
to watch the Roadrunner show
do you know the Road Runner with Wiley
Coyote the coyote that chases after him
and tries to capture him and I don't
know I guess kill him with all of his
might by setting up dynamite
by painting invisible walls that he'll
run into and be destroyed anyway I
decided to watch it with my my little
girls because I remembered as a kid that
it took place in a setting that looked
like the southwest and I wanted to see
if I could figure out what area of the
Southwest it was actually in because I
did mention road runners in this episode
so when I turn it on the first thing I
saw was a Butte a Butte we talked about
b-u-t-t-e and it looks like a mountain
with steep sides and a flat top and a
mountain that is not connected to any
other mountains like in a mountain range
where you would see mountains connected
together it's isolated
so in the middle of the desert very flat
arid dry land you'll see them shooting
up from the ground
right so that is in Monument Valley
Arizona so Wiley Coyote and Roadrunner
are from Monument Valley which is so
cool because as a kid obviously I didn't
have
any reference to that geographical area
but yeah that's where that took place
and it's also really close to Four
Corners Four Corners is a place in the
United States where you can actually put
your hands and feet in different states
four different states actually so you
can have your hands in Utah and in
Colorado and your feet in Arizona and
New Mexico so you can be in four states
at once it's also where the Navajo
Nation is so that is a Native American
tribe and it's the largest federally
recognized tribe in the United States so
it's definitely worth visiting if you
come to the Southwest
once again I hope you really enjoyed
this episode if you would like to get
the bonus material that goes along with
this I highly recommend buying the
premium content you can find that in the
episode notes or on the website at
americanenglishpodcast.com hope you're
having a nice day and until next time
bye

thank you

